---
layout: post
title: The assburger of broken dreams
date: 2025-08-01
category: other
---

## 2015

-- I don't know how you handle it - said the girl I met on Tinder. She was sitting across the kitchen table from me, sipping on her gin and tonic.  
-- What do you mean? - I asked.  
-- Just the dreariness of it all, the boredom. How dull everything is. I go out and party pretty much every evening, but it's still pretty boring. Can't imagine how you stand it just being alone at home in the evenings.  
She was almost ten years younger than me, in her twenties. She told me she enjoyed doing stuff that freaked her out, like visiting strange men she never met at home. That's how she ended up at my place a couple of days ago. There was nothing to freak her out, but she didn't seem to mind for the moment. Our worlds were far apart and never destined to intersect. But we somehow found it easy to talk to each other.  
-- I got plenty of stuff to do, and not enough time - I tried to not sound defensive. - I am reading this book in German, got a huge backlog of old black'n'white films to go through... And then there's my programming projects, and I also play the piano late into the night most nights...  
-- Yeah, right, I'd forgotten you have all these assburgers.  
-- My ass...what?  
-- Meme talk. You know Asperger's? These kids that have obsessions about random stuff? Like these hobbies of yours. Asperger's - ass burgers, get it?  
-- Okay, I guess so...  
She was up to speed with the latest 4chan memes and was teaching me some of it. It felt eerie, like an old man being tutored by a teenager to use a cell phone.

Later that night, after she had left, I was thinking about what she'd said. Do I have too many ass burgers? I never gave it much thought, but somehow there always seemed to be so much interesting stuff to either do or read up on, that I found it difficult to ever be bored. I felt a bit sorry for my strange friend. She was not doing well. I'm not saying my way was better, but it definitely made life easier for me. I had plenty of problems of my own. But at least overwhelming boredom was not one of them.

Some of the things I became interested in came in hard and fizzled out. I immersed myself into them utterly at some point, 5 days a week or more, got to a decent level in skill or knowledge, then quit without feeling bad about it. Aikido, Lindy Hop, learning Japanese. Life had moved on and I didn't have a use for any of them anymore.

Others stayed around for the long term. They would ebb and flow, but never completely go away. Programming, German, retrocomputing, motorcycles. Recently I picked up flying quadcopter drones in first-person view. Not sure how that one is going to turn out yet.

Then there are a bunch of these things I don't actively pursue, but keep a passing interest in, and sometimes do a deep dive on something that interests me. Things like sailing, electronics, historical and modern firearms, aviation. I don't feel like I need or want to immerse myself into any of these, but I'll be happy to learn something about them every now and then.

Finally, there's that one thing, in a category unto itself. Used to be a time in my life where I would devote almost every waking moment to it. Immersed myself completely. Gotten to a decent level of skill. Then it all crashed and burned out. But unlike the other ones I forgot about, this one lingers behind, constantly there in the background. Regret. Waste. Loss. Maybe I can go back. I can't go back, not after what it cost me. That thing is music.

## 2005

I was living in a student dormitory, dragging myself towards a degree in engineering. I hit a snag because I did not have enough credits to enroll in the next semester. But I managed to negotiate a year to repeat the courses I had failed and try again. Part of the reason why I failed those courses was because I felt like learning Japanese and going to Aikido practice were infinitely more interesting than my coursework. Also, I failed to get into Computer Science and was doing Mechatronics instead, which I had zero interest in, so I ended up reading a lot about CS, programming languages, networks, Unixes and such instead. Essentially, I had a curriculum of my own, to the detriment of the official one. 

I don't want to make it sound like I was some kind of overachiever. It certainly didn't feel like it back then, I felt more like a loser. Constantly in guilt over not doing what I was supposed to, but powerless to resist the fix of my obsessions. Today, I'm a little more understanding and even a bit appreciative of myself in those years, but back then it really felt bad.

A side effect of that extra year that fell in my lap was that I suddenly had a lot of time to spare. Going to the several classes did not take too much time. Had plenty left over. My interest in Japanese died down, and I realized Aikido was useless. So what do I do with all this time? 

Living in the dorms was fun. It was essentially an eternal party if you wanted it to be. Plenty of friends around, almost limitless freedom, minimal obligations. But it also had its downsides, particularly if you needed to focus and get some shit done. I learned to block out the noise and distractions with listening to music on my headphones. Never could focus when there was singing though, so all the music I was normally listening to back then (mostly different kinds of rock bands) was out of the question. I read in an article that classical music was supposed to "generate beta waves", and it was good for concentration, or memory, or something. So whenever I needed to study, I would put on Bach and it worked. Not sure about the beta waves part, but at least I could get some work done that way from time to time. 

Later, I started feeling like I was missing that music in other moments in my life. I started expanding into other kinds of Baroque and Classical music. Haendel, Albinoni, Boyce. But my listening didn't really become obsessive until I discovered Romanticism, particularly Chopin, with a bit of Rachmaninov on the side. I got a little bit into more "modern" composers, like Szymanowski, Satie, Grieg, Holst, but that's about as far as I'll go. Anyway, it was in the great outbursts of Romantic repertoire where I would get my thrills and chills. If I wasn't listening, I was whistling or humming, which would piss off my roommates. I watched Youtube recordings of famous pianists deep into the night. I read books and watched movies on classical music, composer's biographies, the works. Went to museums and started hanging out with artsy people. Smoked half of a lung away and drank through a quater of my liver over "deep", quasi-philosophical nighttime discussions with those people about love, life, art, and the meaning of it all. Too bad really I was still enrolled in an engineering course, all that stuff would probably count towards something if I was in the humanities. 😁 Instead, I barely got out of my course credit debt and into the next semester.

## Listening is not enough

More and more, the whole classical listening experience started feeling asthmatic. The more I would gasp for it, the less satisfied I was. I felt like I needed to be able to make this music myself, but how? I didn't have room or money for a piano, nobody to tutor me, and no idea where to start. Then a friend showed me this piece of software which let you play synthesized pipe organ sounds on the computer keyboard. I stayed up all night playing a few bars of Bach's (dubious) Tocatta and Fugue over and over in the toilet as to not disturb my roommate. I had gotten a taste, and I knew now I could use the computer to simulate the instrument's sound, I just needed a better input interface, i.e. a musical keyboard. That was a rabbit hole of research in of itself. I learned about dynamic and non-dynamic keyboards, spring-loaded and hammer-actuated. Synthesized and sampled virtual instruments. Oh, and sound card latency. 25ms is barely playable at quick tempos, so how quick is your sound card? Really, there are faster and slower sound cards? Yes, really. ASIO drivers. Real piano construction, materials, strings, tuning, equal and mean temperament, Pythagorean comma. Can a simulated instrument ever be as good as a real one? I don't know to this day. Oh, and I read a lot of Wikipedia on music theory itself, score notation, scales, chords, stuff like that.

Eventually, I borrowed a keyboard with a lousy sound bank where some keys didn't register at all, or only under extreme force. I learned to play my first piece on that - Chopin's Prelude No. 4. I learned to read music at the same time. It was just one page of notes, easily doable. My fingers would do the movements and out would come this music, and the feeling was amazing. Pretty much the only hard thing was to learn to do different but similar things with my right hand and my left hand at the same time, but I kept at it and it slowly improved. I did not realize at that time that I was already planting the seeds of my own destruction.

## Chasing the perfect setup

Soon after that, I got my first own MIDI keyboard, an M-AUDIO with 49 or 64 keys (a full-sized piano keyboard has 88 keys, but those were too big and expensive). I used a software package called The Grand, which was sampled from a real piano, to generate the sounds with the aid of a PCMCIA sound card with ASIO drivers for improved latency. My repertoire grew with some film music, but mostly Chopin preludes. I was in at the deep end. Developed an obsession on "real pianos", and kept looking for opportunities to play on them. Sometimes I would get the opportunity to play an upright at my university in the student bar, sometimes I would go to restaurants or other places which had pianos. I remember playing my first grand in a ballroom in my home town one Christmas.

I went through some more hardware and software updates, graduating to a Casio digital piano with a weighted keyboard (with hammers like a real piano -- springy keyboards suck for playing classical at speed), and later a pretty solid Roland which looked almost like a real instrument. I started using Ivory II to generate the sound, which is a multi-gigabyte mostrosity of layers of piano samples painstakingly recorded in an anechoic room, with additional digital processing added on top in realtime. Also had a bunch of soundcards over the years in the quest for near-zero latency, until finally settling on a Steinberg USB interface. Oh, and headphones. Do you know almost all consumer headphones boost bass sounds? This makes it almost unbearable to use them when playing live piano, so you need special "monitor" headphones with a flat frequency curve, but those usually come with a large jack plug, and are high impedance which means they are really quiet when connected to a wimpy computer soundcard, so you need an amplifier to drive them, which also introduces noise and distortion... 

Meanwhile, first signs of problems started appearing. I only knew a few pieces, perhaps around 10. Learning a new one took months because I could not read scores very fast (I could not see the patterns, so had to read every single note in complicated scores), and there was all the finger technique that I had to learn on top of that, first hands separate, then painstakingly combining and ramping up the tempo. I raised the bar pretty significantly between each piece, soon I was up to the Chopin Military (Op. 40) Polonaise and the Revolutionary Etude, and it looked like it was going well from the technical side. Being stubborn and methodical paid off dividends in that department, but underneath it was all held with drinking straws and bubble gum. I soon discovered I could not play my first pieces anymore because I stopped repeating them all the time, which was required for maintaining the muscle memory without understanding the music. I essentially learned to type some Shakespeare very fast from memory, without understanding the words. Forget about making even the simplest music of my own that I haven't read and memorized off a score. An interesting insight was that even small amounts of alcohol completely destroyed my ability to play, because it impairs fine motor control. It was mostly muscle memory.

Can you imagine how humiliating it is when somebody hears you've been playing the piano for 10 years and they want you to play Happy Birthday for them, only to hear that you cannot? Of course, they will not believe it, thinking it's just performance anxiety, perfectionism, or just me being an asshole who can't be bothered to play a song that's beneath my mad piano skills. Meanwhile I'm here wishing I could play it even with one hand, but I really can't. Not to even mention any sort of improvisation or anything vaguely creative at the keyboard.

## The harsh mistress

See, the problem with music is that it's nothing like a branch of engineering knowledge. Despite centuries of tradition and study, there is no "official" way to learn it. For pretty much any "difficult" technical skill like programming, bridge building or rocket science, there is a bunch of prerequisites which you need to know, like some basic math, a theory that you must ingest, and some courses or practical training that will teach you how to do the thing that you want to do. Not so much with music. Oh, there is a shitload of theory, deconstructing the smallest bits of known compositions down to the subatomic level, but there's no indication of what part of it is actually useful in learning to play, or where you should start. The advice I got was to "just play", with the assurance that one day it would all just "click" and I would be able to play anything. Well, let me tell you it doesn't work that way. Neither did reading up on music theory help in any way. How the hell does knowing what a diminished chord is and how it's different from a minor one, or how a major 7th inverts into a minor 2nd, or what a I-IV-V-I progression is, help me in the slightest to play something I hear clearly in my head? Fuck all, that's what. And I know that because I know all that stuff, and it is just useless knowledge at the back of my head.

In fact, music is to my knowledge one of the most obfuscated sciences in the world, potentially with the exclusion of economics/monetary theory (which actively uses complexity to not explain but rather to obfuscate relatively simple mechanisms). Everybody will tell you something different, the books will all say mostly the same things but none of it useful, and your own intuition will lead you astray unless you stumble onto something that works by chance. I didn't, but not for lack of trying.

## Singles counseling

Around that time I had already graduated, was working a steady job, had some disposable income, and decided I would try taking lessons. After some fiascos in that department, where the prospective teacher would tell me I was too old to learn anything, or that I should just play jazz standards and hope for the best (see, everybody has a different idea on how you learn music), I found a good teacher who took pity on me. We were actually close in age, so we became friends, and that kind of interfered with the learning process, because we would just sort of hang out together for hours, talking about music or pretty much anything else, sometimes doing an exercise. I learned about the importance of recognizing musical intervals (the distance between two sounds) by ear, and ear training overall, likewise recognizing of chords by ear, playing solfege etc. and how all that (hopefully) adds up to a functional musical education. But it was too late for me. I was a musically dead man walking, I just didn't know. I didn't have any of the old passion left to carry all this new effort that was required. Some evenings I want in to get a quick fix of playing Chopin's Prelude 16, the last piece I ever "learned". It actually sounded pretty good, but by then I only knew it and about 3 other pieces that I kept playing over and over. All the joy was gone, instead quickly being replaced by a mixture of anger, guilt, remorse, and an overall feeling of tiredness. I resigned from the music school. At the final graduation concert I played Bach's Goldberg Variation and a Rachmaninov prelude. The latter was pretty funny, being a deeply depressive and disturbing piece that I played in front of a group of mostly children who were utterly confused by that spectacle, on a keyboard with a loosely hanging sustain pedal which kept sliding across the floor, so by the end of my concerto, I was almost under the piano, reaching far with my foot to keep it on the pedal. How wonderfully representative of my entire great musical carreer. Fuck.

## Afermath

In 2018, I met my wife and we got married some time after. I sold my piano a while before that. By then, I wasn't playing it at all, in fact I had already stopped a few years back. Then my daughter was born. I don't have time for music, and even thinking about it causes me pain. It's something that I wanted and needed very much, but despite sinking in a lot of effort, could not make it work. It is the only instance in my life where perserverance and hard work actually worked against me and derailed my efforts. It remains one of the biggest failures and regrets of my life. I'm not writing this because I want pity. I want this to serve as a warning for any who would take it upon themselves to tread the same path. 

Finally, this serves as a compositional brace for this journal of mine. Back when I still believed I had the strength to do something about it, I wrote up a short version of this story as a question on the [Music Stack Exchange](https://music.stackexchange.com/questions/926/how-do-i-begin-finally-making-music-on-the-piano). Somebody graciously commented that it was well written and asked if I had a blog, to which I replied no. But the idea stuck around that perhaps I could start one some day, which is why this thing exists. I don't plan  on writing more personal posts like this one, but I just felt like this experience was worth putting to paper.

## ...or not entirely?

I bought a MIDI keyboard last week. I thought maybe it would be fun for my daughter, show her some funny sounds, maybe how to play a melody on the white keys. Maybe it will spark some creative instinct in her? When I have some free time, I use it with [EarMaster](https://www.earmaster.com/) which I still have a license for from the old days, to do some interval identification for fun, instead of reading news or scrolling through the Facebook feed. Played some melodies with one hand by ear. Maybe will try solfege at some point. There are no expectations this time. And it's just [too dinky](https://www.m-audio.com/keyboard-controllers/keystation-mini32-mk3.html) to play Chopin even if I wanted to, so I physically can't make the same mistakes.

I hope that girl is doing okay, she really was in a bad place. We only met two or three times to talk. She was my first Tinder date and she taught me a funny poem which I used as a pickup line on my future wife some 3 years later, which was when I could luckily leave Tinder behind. I hear it's a hellscape nowadays.