---
layout: post
title: Back from the dead
date: 2026-05-19
category: f15-se2
---
<small>(_This post is part of a [series]({% link category/f15-se2.html %}) on the subject of my hobby project, which is recreating the C source code for the 1989 game [F-15 Strike Eagle II]({% post_url 2022-06-05-origins %}) by reverse engineering the original binaries._)</small>

There's no use pretending, the project had become a bit neglected. I wanted to take a break from it last summer to spend more time with my family and play through a few games from my Steam backlog, and it turned into an almost year-long hiatus. I got burned out a bit while working on a huge routine from `egame.exe` and found it hard to make progress despite it being 90% done. It's still not complete, but it seems like we're going to be back and running again.

The big news is that the project has gained a prolific [contributor](https://github.com/AJenbo), who's pumping life into it with frequent and regular updates. I'm no longer doing this alone and it's a big boost for my enthusiasm and inspiration. `end.exe` has been mostly reconstructed in a matter of two weeks or so. We're currently considering a different workflow to get `egame.exe` up and running out of life support soon, and other overdue tasks may finally see some progress. 

The other thing that I wanted to write about today is the usage of LLMs. Wait, don't close the tab yet. I know a lot of people in tech are fed up with stories about "agentic AI driving synergies in a multi-modal collaboration environment". I'm sick of the hype and the insanity of the markets myself. But I promise this is going to be a bit different. Most people seem to be firmly stuck in either the camp of "AI is going to remake the world and give me infinite $$$" or "these useless word salad generators can't die soon enough". I think there's a great need for some realism and voices from the middle ground, so I wanted to share my perspective on LLMs in general, and then talk about my experiences with using them practically in a personal project.

# An entirely unsolicited take on LLMs

Sorry, I can't call them AI, just physically can't. There's no way around it, these things are not intelligent. They are driven purely by statistics, generating words that are associated with the desired outcome in a probabilistic space, obtained by sampling the entire body of text ever produced by the human civilization (or as much of it as could possibly be stolen by the AI companies). As much as the purveyours of "AI" would like to pretend otherwise with buzzwords like "chain of thought" and "reasoning", there is no logical thinking involved. The "knowledge" held by LLMs is [purely correlational](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41599-020-0494-4), so they only "know" how strongly thing A is related to thing B.

But curiously enough, a lot of the time, just that knowledge alone is enough to solve a problem. Anything where an approximate or superficial answer is good enough, or useful as a starting point. Anything to do with text, summarizing, translation, recognizing patterns in data, weather forecasts, earthquake prediction, medical imaging analysis -- things whose automation seemed like science fiction or magic just a few years ago, now made practical and robust.  There are fields that are quietly being revolutionized by models -- not all of them LLMs. But hardly any of that cuts through the incessant screaming of AI companies pumping up the hype of their products being "almost sentient", the mass media picking up the narrative without any critical thinking, and the markets reacting hysterically with insane valuations of companies which have yet to make a single dollar of profit. 

I think what will happen is, there will be a reckoning at some point. The investors will call the bet, and ask to see the financial results, then cut off the VC funding when it becomes clear there's no path to profitability. Some of these companies will go from being worth billions to zero. The Big Tech companies will exit in time with record profits, and the losers will be left holding the bag. "AI" is going to sound boring, perhaps leaving a bad taste in your mouth, like "blockchain" or "NFT" before it. The industry (or what is left of it) will move onto the next craze. We are going to miss the "good old days" of AI. The LLMS will still be around, but we're going to have to pay for using them, or they will have ads up the wazoo -- likely both. Kind of like web search before and after it turned to shit.

One of the most interesting aspects of LLM application, and certainly the one driving most frenzy these days is their application to coding. Code is structured text, perfect for ingestion and manipulation by models. They can be very useful for summarizing what a piece of code does, refactoring, autocompletion, even writing some code from scratch. Of course, it will usually fail spectacularily when you ask it to write something innovative, but let's be honest, how much of the code we write has never been written before? Most of the time it's iterating over a list of things obtained from one place and storing it somewhere else. This is where these tools shine, and I say good riddance. That way we have more time to focus on the actually exciting bits.

# Putting it to (good?) use

For a project like mine, where we're trying to translate code from one form into another using a set of unspoken and/or vague rules, models seem like a perfect fit, which is why I was considering using a "neural network" (remember where it was still being called that?) years ago, but it seemed wildly unrealistic. But guess what, the future is now, and I think reverse engineering is going to go through its golden age because of these new tools. For me, the project has always been about having fun with technology and exploring modern tech by applying it to old tech, as much as the actual game reconstruction. So I wanted to have a little bit of fun with these new toys.

But the twist is, I don't want to use a publically available model from one of the big companies and run out of tokens after a while. Nor do I want to pay a subscription and run out of tokens after a longer while. A while back, I got a Radeon RX 9070 XT GPU, and I need to justify that purchase by proving it's not "just for games". It turns out you can run LLMs locally on your own hardware, which is perfect because unlike using a ready-made model from a subscription, I'm going to be able to control every aspect of the models' operation, and learn much more by setting up everything myself, including figuring out where the friction points and limitations are.

# First the hardware

Running LLM inference involves solving a bunch of linear algebra equations, which is almost the same problem as moving 3D shapes around, which in turn is best solved by GPUs which have massively parallel processing capabilities for just this sort of thing. In theory, you could run LLMs on a CPU, but it would be just very slow.

To fit the model, and its context (more on that later), you need memory. If you're going to run it on your GPU, using the main system RAM memory is not going to cut it, because moving the data between the RAM and the GPU is going to be too slow. So you need video RAM (VRAM), and as much of it as possible. My card has 16GB of it, which is ok for games, but modest for running LLMs. A model is essentially a huge array of numbers (weights), which are also called parameters. The more weights a model has, the "smarter" it is, which is why models are described as "7B", "14B" or "128B", which means they have as many billion parameters. With the amount of VRAM I have, I can realistically run a 24B model, or a 32B one if I'm okay with some of it spilling into system RAM - this will work fine, but might run a little slower. I'm fine with that, it's still going to be orders of magnitude faster than me, if I can get it work.

# Then the software

To actually "run" the model, you need some software to handle allocating the video memory, loading the model into it, grabbing the prompt text, applying it to the model for evaluation by the GPU and returning the result back. Think of it as a sort of Docker for LLMs. I am using [Ollama](https://ollama.com/) for this purpose.

In my case, I'm running this workload on Windows. It would work just as fine or better on Linux (Windows will need 1-2GB of VRAM for rendering the GUI), but that's what I'm going with, so YMMV.

# Ollama configuration